[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Land art, sometimes
known as earthworks,
is an art movement that
started in the USA.
>> Land art is a combination
with something created
by an artist and what
already is in place.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Instead of paper of
canvas, I needed space.
>> Nature offers so many
opportunities for seeing in new
ways.
>> Land art was when we
discovered really what it
looked like from above.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Viewed from the sky, land
art reveals its vastness and art
in landscape dimensions.
This form of contemporary art
uses the natural elements--
wood, stone, water,
earth, plants, sand.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
You could call it a
honeymoon with nature.
>> It's a dance with nature.
>> The people who see it
are affected in some way.
>> These artists have left their
workshops for a new dimension,
a voyage of initiation.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> It's temporary, and that's
what makes it interesting.
>> Anything we can create will
eventually fade away and will
be forgotten.
>> Beneath the open sky, their
art galleries and museums are
called planet Earth.
To discover the
beauty of land art,
we will travel the world
to visit some of the most
spectacular artworks
as seen from above,
a journey that begins with
the more permanent pieces,
ending with temporary works.
This artistic movement
believes that art and nature
are inseparable.
The first works were
created in the grand desert
landscapes of western
America in the late 1960s.
Like many movements
at the time, land art
was a way of connecting
art and life,
fleeing traditional
museum exhibitions
and the financial
circuits of galleries.
Some installations are
monumental and require
a tremendous amount of work.
Today, many have become
accessible and permanent
through photography.
In the USA, the town
of Alliance in Nebraska
is the home of an artwork that
is pulling in the tourists.
Fascinated by the prehistoric
monument of Stonehenge,
Jim Reinders created a replica
in 1986 with vintage cars.
>> Carhenge is sort of the
21st century reproduction
of Stonehenge.
>> No stone or rocks
were in the vicinity,
so Jim took what was at hand,
cars from the 1940s and '50s.
Jeep, Plymouth, Cadillac.
At the time, the
piece intrigued.
Some locals even
called it a junkyard.
>> They were getting in trouble
for having junk cars sitting
out there.
>> The town back then
seemed a bit divided.
>> They were divided on it.
On it.
with more of a creative
mind would say,
oh, it's going to be neat.
It's a piece of art.
And then there were some
that just said, it's--
>> It's junk.
>> There were a lot of citizens
that really didn't like
Carhenge for a lot of years.
They thought it was
unsightly, and they
didn't want a junkyard
representing their town.
>> Carhenge was abandoned
and left to rust.
>> People came out, and
they just drank out here,
left empty beer cans,
and everything like that.
Just littered all
over the place.
It wasn't someplace
you wanted to go.
>> Local authorities have
recently taken control,
and the site has since
become an attraction.
>> Artists started noticing it.
>> Artists started--
>> And instead of it
being junk, it became art.
>> Yes.
>> People started to get an
understanding of how many
people come to see
this particular view
of someone's art.
>> Today, Carhenge attracts
80,000 tourists a year,
and the local inhabitants of
Nebraska have since learned
to appreciate and respect
this rather unusual creation.
Far from the crowds in the
Sahara Desert of Morocco
is where the German
artist Hannsjorg Voth
decided to settle back in 1987.
Like a hermit, he created
three monumental artworks
over a period of 20 years
on this vast sandy canvas.
His adventure began with
this astounding "Stairway
to Heaven," 16 meters high.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I named it
"Stairway to Heaven"
in reference to transcendence, a
Latin word that implies a shift
in human boundaries.
That is what transcendence
is really all about,
because we are all ephemeral.
There's an end to everything.
>> A staircase that stands
proudly towards the sky like
humans.
Only here, it is crafted
out of compressed clay.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> When I was drawing
the "Stairway to Heaven,"
I had the intention to build
it in a remote and secret
location, somewhere
hard to get to.
And that is one of the
reasons I went to Morocco.
I wanted to build it from
earth that would in time return
To the earth.
That meant living in the
project, working on it,
and then letting it go.
Letting the piece
return to dust.
>> Mohamed is the
caretaker of this land art.
For him, the stairway
has a different purpose,
a more matter of fact one
than this vast desert.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> For us nomads, we climb
the staircase to look out
at the horizon and check if rain
is coming or if other nomads
are settling in the area.
If We can see if
a storm is brewing
or if there are greener
areas for our animals.
It also gives us shade when
the heat is suffocating.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> When there is a sandstorm,
all the animals disperse.
When the nomads climb to
the top of the stairway,
they can locate them
easier with the help
of a pair of binoculars.
That's OK for me.
It wasn't my initial
intention, but I don't
expect them to think as we do.
>> Each step takes us back
through our own history
to a time when humanity was
in harmony with the gods.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
For us, God is in
the seventh heaven,
and you can't get
there by climbing
50-odd steps on a stairway.
>> A few minutes' ride from
the "Stairway to Heaven"
is the second earthwork
of Hannsjorg Voth,
the "Golden Spiral."
Named by Mohamed as The
Snail, it holds in its center
a well over 17 meters deep.
Water, the most
essential element
for survival in this
hostile environment.
All the harmony
of this edifice is
based on prodigious
proportions, the golden section.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
The "Golden Section" has been
used by artists and architects
since the ancient
Greeks in order
to create a perfect
aesthetic design,
and I used it in
the "Golden Spiral."
>> On the horizon, the third
piece of the artist stands out
clearly like a castle.
The "City of Orion" refers
to the distinct constellation
of stars named Orion.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I think the "City of
Orion" is highly mythological.
Orion comes from
Greek mythology.
>> According to the legend,
Orion represents a hunter that
has the power to
kill any animal.
Mohamed knows the legend well.
He can draw the "City
of Orion" in the sand,
linking all 24 stars that
make up a man holding a bow.
For the artist, each
piece of land art
has a message and
representation.
The "Stairway to Heaven"
is transcendence.
The "Golden Spiral" is revival.
And the "City of Orion"
is that of the cosmos.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> It's three sculptures that I
did like that without thinking
about it, but they
work well together.
What is most important
is that I was
able to work in peace
for roughly 15 years
without being disturbed,
to go deep inside of me
and follow my intention.
>> To help finance
his art in the desert,
Hannsjorg Voth held
several exhibitions.
But the cost of
this public exposure
had considerable consequences.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> From that moment
on came the investors,
the Europeans and the Spanish
with their four-wheel drives
that destroyed the landscape.
And when disturbed, I leave.
>> The arrival of visitors and
tourists put an end to 20 years
of creation.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> It's a curse.
On the one hand, you want
to show your artwork.
On the other hand, it's
just so difficult in a place
where there are no rules,
no laws, no police.
Solitude is a precious gift
that is becoming hard to find.
>> Being far from public sight
is also the goal of French
artist Jean Verame.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> I'm not an exhibitionist,
so I go to desert places where
nobody goes.
>> In 1984, he too
was in Morocco,
several hundred kilometers
south of the "City of Orion,"
exploring a vast zone of
granite close to the Berber town
of Tafraoute.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> You are confronted with
something highly powerful.
We call it nature, sure.
Nature doesn't care
a damn about humans.
Nature is there.
It's terrifying, wild,
deathly, and humans do not
exist in that landscape.
>> With 18 tons of paint, Jean
Verame creates a new dimension.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Three dimensions
already exist.
I come to these massive rocks.
They're there, and I
add a new dimension.
Paint is a fourth
dimension, and these places
are not insensitive.
I can feel the rock.
It is happy and agrees to my
painting it, and so I paint it.
Others refuse.
I can feel it.
How?
I don't know.
It's irrational.
But it's a reality.
>> A land art of painted rocks
spreads over several thousand
square meters.
Seen from above,
the pink reflects
the blue like a love story.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> The pink is a little
like man and woman.
These rocks are all about
a love story between a man
and a woman, a spirit of love.
>> Yes, it is a love story, but
not between a man and a woman.
A love story is not limited
to a man and a woman.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There is some kind
of osmosis going on.
It's a honeymoon, a
honeymoon with nature.
The rock ends up inside you.
>> The visitor enters the
artwork and becomes part
of the landscape.
>> They're so distraught.
It's the first time they're
entering a painting.
Instead of standing at the
museum or in a gallery,
they're inside it.
With each step, everything
changes around them.
>> Today, the colors of the
rocks have been worn by time
and the footsteps of visitors,
and has little to do with
the original deeply
intense colors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
I love cobalt blue, but I
put a drop of violet cobalt.
That gives a new
vibration that doesn't
exist in pure cobalt blue.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> You have this paint spray
gun, and the paint gushes out.
You paint your first
rock, and you look around.
The whole landscape has changed
just because of one blue rock.
It's no longer the
same place as before.
Then suddenly, you go
into the magic of it all.
>> The magic of
land art is freedom,
freedom that
condemns the system.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Everyone has their
own way of rebellion.
You choose it at 18.
Either you turn to
violence and throw stones,
or you attack the police.
Or you choose another way of
rebellion, and that takes time.
What are you going to do?
What is the rebellion?
I chose this artistic
expression as a way
to affirm my place
on this planet,
to give it some kind of meaning.
It's still a way--
it's not the aim--
but it is a way to
fuck the system.
>> Today, the site is
a visitor attraction,
but the art has been
covered in graffiti.
The staff at the
local municipality
do their best to cover it up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> We'll try and repaint this
with a color that matches
the rock.
Try not to drop any
paint on the ground
so as to keep the whole site
as beautiful as possible.
>> The natural elements
are not alone in changing
the landscape.
The varying shades of paint
used by the local staff
contribute to its evolution.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> If each visitor comes and
tags a part of these rocks,
we'll end up with an ugly site.
>> Learning about the
construction painters' onsite
activity, Jean
Verame is furious.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Oh, great!
Just a brush.
They don't even
have a compressor.
Ugh.
It's their paint that is pale.
Well, yes, blue is expensive.
The blue that I use is costly.
The artist would
prefer his work be
left to the natural elements.
The municipality are
waging a never-ending war
against the graffiti
to protect the site
and continue to
attract tourists.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> I'm surprised that they
don't even bother to have a more
intense blue.
It's all so cheap.
I saw it.
They take a large pot of white
paint and drop a bit of blue
into it.
Bloody hell.
How rude.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> Paris has its Eiffel Tower.
New York has its
Statue of Liberty.
Tafraoute has its painted rocks.
And I hope that one day,
it will be classified
World Heritage Site by UNESCO.
>> In nature, there is a large
variety of raw materials.
A group of Russian
artists have created
works made of wood that
lose color with time.
Several works are
twisted, arched,
modeled to symbolize the
harmony between human creativity
and the natural
force of the forest.
A demonstration to show
that art and nature
go truly hand-in-hand.
Back to the USA to
discover one of land
art's pioneers based
in the state of Kansas,
right in the center
of the country.
If many artists choose a
low-key and minimalist approach
to land art, be it in the
choice of raw materials, forms,
or representations, Stan Herd
creates more representational
earthworks.
>> From a very early age, I
began to look at what art was
out there in the world.
Certainly, Vincent van Gogh's
work jumped out as very unique.
And then really, when you
started to read his story,
then you really
start to understand
the soul of the artist.
Vincent lived it as no other
man did, in my opinion.
>> Stan paid tribute to the
man who inspired his art
by creating a large-scale
reproduction of Vincent van
Gogh's 1889 painting
"Olive Trees."
The landscape is his canvas.
His paints are made up
of plants and rocks.
>> He painted a tree that was
actually there in southern
France, and I'm reproducing
that tree with an actual plant.
So there was this Earth thing.
Van Gogh was all about nature.
He was all about living it.
He saw it in ways that
very few of us ever see it.
I felt like I got
a glimpse of how
he saw it by spending six
months recreating this piece.
>> A massive living earthwork
over 6,000 square meters
in size.
>> I lost 600 plants out of
the 1,000 that I planted,
and my oats didn't grow.
So I had to rethink
that, you know?
But you can't get mad about it.
You're working with nature,
with rain, with clouds,
with insects.
The deer came and ate all
of my squash one morning.
The camera and the plane
happened about the same time.
So there was this
incredible sensory overload,
looking at a planet
that we lived on forever
in a brand new way.
So land art was when
we discovered really
what it looked like
from above, and realized
that ancient people had been
creating things on the ground
forever.
>> Stan is deeply moved by
the works of Native American
Indians.
Their ancient engravings,
petroglyphs, and geoglyphs
have inspired him.
If their symbols
remain a mystery,
many works have a tendency to
bond human life with the Earth
and the universe.
>> The earthworks are kind
of guided by something else,
in a way.
And our life is, and
our art is certainly.
>> What is that something else?
>> Well, you know, it's probably
to me just an understanding
of how small we are
in the universe.
>> In 1992, the country was
preparing to celebrate 500
years since the discovery
of America by Christopher
Columbus.
>> People in the country were
deciding how to celebrate it,
except for Native
American people.
And they were thinking,
well, do we really
want to celebrate
this thing that
brought smallpox to our
people and changed our world?
[MOTOR]
>> The Haskell Indian Nations
University called on Stan Herd.
>> The medicine wheel--
some people will call
it the sacred circle--
is probably the most iconic,
the most symbolic representation
of indigenous worldviews,
intellectual, spiritual,
and cultural traditions
that we can find, certainly
in North America.
I thought it might start
a dialogue for healing,
because really, if you
think of the 500 years,
we've had really an incredible
collision of cultures.
>> Stan was commissioned to
create a large-scale earthwork
of the medicine wheel to
symbolize forgiveness.
A fireplace at the
heart of the wheel
is encircled by four
cardinal keystones
that invite the visitor
to a spiritual experience.
>> People come out here and
they pray, they'll do songs,
they'll use this,
because I think this is--
we don't have a
chapel on campus.
This is the closest thing we
have to a chapel, you know,
is right here.
>> Stan Herd had the privilege
of approaching the mystical
and secret world of
native Indians of America,
a source of his inspiration.
>> The fact that I'm non-native
and that these people whom
my European ancestors kind
of trampled for 100 years,
and getting invited back to be
a part of this was very special.
And this ground that
we're standing on
is sacred, not because
of the artwork.
Because of the history
of these people.
If we have anything
to learn, we have
it to learn from
indigenous people who
have had this ancient
connection to the landscape.
A lot of it, I'm not even
really conscious of it.
It comes out, I put it on
the canvas, and I go, hmm.
I like that.
And later, I try
to figure out why,
and what the inspiration
was necessarily.
So I like that.
I like to get out of my way.
>> We're going to need,
like, a bunch of water.
>> Yeah.
>> Just a little bit of water's
not going to do anything.
>> Hopefully it'll rain.
To dance with nature,
you can't fight it.
You have to work in balance
with it to a certain extent.
It's an embrace of
nature, in a way.
I think people's lives
are changed a teeny bit
when they come to visit it,
because they find themselves
in it.
They It reveals their desire to
garden, to work with the land,
to get their hands in the soil.
>> And this is on her--
you said on her brooch?
>> This is-- you know,
it's near her hair.
>> To be able to sit inside
this artwork feels surreal.
It's not something
you can typically do.
This is not just dry paint.
This is a living organism.
Every plant has a soul.
The whole thing is alive.
>> Sometimes mysterious
things happen.
Plants grow up that I wasn't
expecting that change of color,
and I like it.
Sometimes I hate it.
[LAUGH]
So I never really know
what I'm going to get.
And oftentimes, I'm surprised.
>> French artist Michel Granger
is also in the representational
art movement.
He is world famous
for his paintings that
illustrate magazine
covers, posters, stamps,
and record covers.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> The original was like this.
>> He reproduced a
land art version of one
of the spectators in his
masterpiece "Stage Fright"
from the cover of
the album "Équinoxe"
by Jean-Michel Jarre.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> I imagine the
author, the singer,
or the musician standing on
stage, looking at the audience,
each one looking back through
a pair of binoculars like this.
Wouldn't it be imposing?
An audience without binoculars
is pretty impressive,
but close up like that, it's
probably highly emotional.
>> Both size and color of the
original painting were to be
forgotten for the
land art experience.
Landscape and dimension.
Green was the new
dominant shade.
For the land art experience,
Michel Granger chose a spot
at an aerodrome close
to the town of Bezançon.
>> It's several
football fields in size.
We leave the traditional
canvas for a new dimension, one
that planet Earth gives us.
It isn't infinite, but could be.
We probably could make
an infinite land art.
>> The secret to his shades of
green lies in the height of his
mowing.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> When the grass is high,
we get a dark green color.
When it's short, we
get a garden green.
If we cut the grass
even more, the green
becomes closer to the surface.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> It's really interesting,
because the grass becomes
a pictorial element.
And just by working with grass,
mowing at different heights,
it produces a variety of
different shades of green.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> I wanted to reproduce a
member of the audience from
the "Stage Fright
Équinoxe" painting,
someone looking through
a pair of binoculars.
Imagine a small plane
approaching the aerodrome,
its occupants looking down
and seeing this huge image
on the ground that is
looking back up at them
through a pair of binoculars.
>> This style of land art is
similar to crop circles that
appear in fields during
the summer months,
and in snow during the winter.
Over the past few years, ski
stations all over the world
are requesting this
new style of land art.
To create these
original tracks, no need
to know how to ski, but to
walk in style, British style.
>> I was always mad
about mountains,
and when you've got
mountain combined with snow,
it makes them even better.
I just like snow a lot.
I like its texture.
And the simple fact that you
can draw a line through it
so easily just by
walking through it.
>> An orienteering and
geometrical enthusiast,
Simon Beck swapped his
life as an Oxford-qualified
cartographer to carry out his
hobby in solidarity artwork.
>> Never quite as easy as
you think, getting these on.
>> His art requires the
combination of three key
elements.
Fresh snow, blue skies,
and little or no wind.
At Les Arc ski station, Simon
has spotted an ideal sight
at an altitude of 2,500
meters, a frozen lake covered
in a thick layer of powder snow,
Lake Marloup, a flat surface
of one and a half hectares.
It is 8:00 AM, and
Simon is alone.
He places his first
markers using a compass
and counting his steps.
Here he cannot rub
out any mistakes.
>> Two, three, four,
five, six, seven.
Oops.
Oh.
Oh, well.
When you make a
booboo, what you do
is you change the design
so it looks right.
[LAUGH]
Yeah, I should have curved left.
I curved right.
I'm not quite the
right shape now.
Never mind.
We'll do all of
them curving right.
You reproduce that mistake six
times throughout the drawing,
and then it looked
like it was meant
to be there in the first place.
Drawings don't always end
up how they originally
were planned to be.
>> The sun isn't up yet, and the
tracks are already in danger.
>> It's blowing a bit.
It might spoil the drawing.
I don't think it's going
to wreck the drawing.
>> Simon always starts out his
land art by placing several
equidistant markers that
will be linked by foot.
>> Here comes the sun.
Dun, dun, dun, da-dun!
Bam, bam, bam, bam, bam,
bam, bam, bam, bam, bam, bam.
>> In today's society of
sophisticated technology,
Simon does without a
computer, GPS, or sat nav,
and always works alone.
The drawing is
memorized in his head.
>> Land art is a combination
with something created
by an artist and what already
is in place, be that the trees,
the fields, the mountains,
the surroundings.
So the two are like a
team, acting in symbiosis
to complement each other.
And so the whole
result is better
than the sum of the parts.
>> The striking precision of
each of Simon Beck's footsteps
is what makes this
giant piece of snow art.
>> The Eskimos apparently have
70 different words for snow,
and they write for lots and
lots of different kinds of snow.
His art requires an outstanding
level of physical endurance,
and at an altitude of 2,500
meters, oxygen levels are low.
[HEAVY BREATHING]
>> You sound exhausted.
>> Whoo!
Yeah, I'm getting
a bit tired now.
Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I mean, people
keep asking me, how
do I feel when it gets
covered up by fresh snow?
And I say, well, I don't mind.
Once I've got the photographs,
the job's been done.
When it gets covered
up, I make another one.
Provided I can get the main
lines drawn during the daytime,
then I can carry on after
dark in the radius of light
I can see using my head torch.
It's fantastic this time of day.
The colors of the mountains
are just so beautiful.
>> Is this what you
come here for, Simon?
>> Yeah.
I really-- I hate having
to go back to Britain.
I think I might stay
here till I die.
>> Simon has not completed
his work, and dusk has fallen.
He takes advantage of this
moment of beauty and quietude
to take a short
break and recuperate.
>> I mean, it's fantastic
up here, isn't it?
That bright star is Venus.
Is snow my friend?
Not when I'm just about
to die of hypothermia, no.
[LAUGH]
I don't know.
I mean, snow is so expert at
getting where it isn't wanted.
>> Night has set in, and the
temperature is minus 10 degrees
centigrade.
Alone and exhausted,
Simon is set
on finishing his task
in the dark in the hope
that he can take a
photo the next morning.
He must get his shot on
camera before fresh snowflakes
cover it up forever.
As the night settles
in the French Alps,
a new day begins in California.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Andres Amador is on the
lookout for a new workplace.
>> What I'm looking for
for my artwork is space,
as much as I can have.
And flatness.
I can only do my
artwork during low tide.
And so that depends
upon the cycles
of the moon and the Earth,
and every day it changes.
And every day, my
canvas changes.
>> Andres has dedicated
his life to sand art,
the creation of land art
on the beach, since 2004.
>> Almost every beach has
a different type of sand.
And the sand here in San
Diego has been very fine
and has been perfect
for the artwork,
because it holds
moisture very well.
It doesn't dry out too quickly.
But then at the same
time, it's very compact,
so you have to push a lot
harder to get the rake to dig in
deep enough to make the mark.
I make mistakes all the time.
So then I have to improvise
and keep it together somehow.
>> How do you create something
that's so big that you
can't see, and you're inside of?
How do you keep it all together?
And this is showing
one way, which
is to create kind
of linear grid,
and then I can start to
fill it in with these kind
of blocky shapes.
People, when they're
walking by, were asking me,
what does it mean?
Does it say something?
And it looks like a language.
So I was like, cool.
That's kind of the thought.
Every culture seems
to have its way
of writing that looks
like drawing that is just
like some alien language.
This piece is
inspired by carvings
on rocks called petroglyphs,
done by cultures
thousands of years ago.
And it has a feeling like this
has been carved into the beach.
This took longer than expected.
It was more complex.
I didn't get as far as I wanted
to, so I wanted to go bigger,
and I wanted to
at least complete
going down into the
water before the sun set.
So I didn't make that goal.
But it feels good.
I mean, I think it
looks really good.
>> This giant piece of artwork
measures over 150 meters long
and eight meters wide.
>> So I'm just going to do
this last part that goes
into the water, and
then I can step away.
And
>> Ephemeral is, as always,
the rule of the game.
Andres will not have time to
capture his completed work
on camera as the tide
will clear the beach
in the darkness of the night.
Back in the French
Alps, the night
was short for Simon Beck,
who returned to his studio.
He's impatient to capture
his work on camera,
the ultimate step that
will enable his effort
to be immortalized and shared.
He worked a fair
part of the night,
but just what are his limits
in such difficult conditions?
>> You draw until you're too
tired to carry on drawing.
So the limiting factor
is not how long it takes.
It's how much you can do
before you get too tired.
The greatest danger
of doing a drawing
is simply hypothermia,
getting too tired
and grinding to a halt.
And if you got too tired,
you basically sit down
in the snow and die.
You see that pattern
in the snow now?
You can see the remains
of an old drawing.
>> Simon climbs to an altitude
of 2,700 meters to get a good
sight at his creation.
>> This is the big moment,
when you see the drawing
for the first time.
There's always a
feeling of anticipation
as you get out of the lift
here and walk over to the edge.
And there it is.
Well, I can genuinely say
that is actually better
than I expected.
I'm quite pleased with that.
Looks so good from
here with that mountain
in the background.
It is not ephemeral.
Now we've got photography.
Most people will only ever see
the majority of the world's
artworks as photographs.
So it's not the real
thing, of course.
But the other way to
answer that question
is to look at the situation we'd
have if it was not ephemeral.
Every possible place
you can draw something
would be covered in graffiti
of one sort or another.
>> Depending on
weather conditions,
Simon creates roughly 40
landscapes each winter.
His art requires a sharp
mind and a trained body.
>> You can argue over
how much is mathematics,
how much is geometry,
how much is art?
There's a bit of all three.
Most of it is done indoors.
When you're outdoors,
it's a question
of putting your drawing
on paper and changing it
into a drawing in the snow.
You never quite know how it's
going to turn out, though,
so there's always a certain
amount of uncertainty in it.
Occasionally, somebody
will ask, what is it?
It isn't really meant to be
anything in the real world.
It's just a rather
attractive geometric pattern.
>> I think it's
absolutely beautiful.
It's brilliant, because you just
sort of come around the corner,
and suddenly you can
just see it in the snow.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> It's magnificent.
What does it inspire?
Curiosity, because we
don't know how he does it.
>> I think he does
it by walking.
>> Is that-- really?
Wow.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> How on Earth can he draw
such a perfect geometric form
by foot?
It's baffling.
>> He's an artist.
He needs to express himself.
>> I suppose you could
call it tag snow.
>> And that is how the visitors
of the day nicknamed Simon
Beck.
Tag snow, the man
who tags the snow.
>> I'd love to have enough
money to fund a team of people
to come out and help me
make a really big drawing.
That is my dream.
>> Back to California where
Andres Amador is doing just
that, directing a team to
create a new collective form
of artwork.
>> Inhale from the Earth.
And exhale, forward
roll down to the ground,
touching the ground.
And then inhale, slowly
rolling up from the Earth.
Bring the energy up.
And exhale, reaching up to the
sky, pushing energy to the sky.
And at first, I called
them the prayer artworks,
because it really felt like
I was engaging in a living
prayer, a prayer in action.
But prayer feels very
religious, and what I'm doing
is not about religion.
I would say it's about
spirituality in the sense
that it is about how we can
engage life at a deeper level,
at a higher level, at a
more fulfilling level.
>> Start to lift.
Lift, lift, lift,
lift, lift, lift.
See?
It is kind of a strenuous job.
See how you're still
make a deep gouge?
>> It's still too deep.
>> They start out by tracing
outlines for the principle
heavy shadings.
On the beach, only the
deeper marks will be seen.
Light footprints will be
invisible from the sky.
How is that going?
Does that feel OK?
>> Yeah.
>> Would you do
more on this one?
>> Sure.
Same technique.
>> Same thing.
OK.
To Ron, I'm going to
have you do spirals.
Even with myself, I need to be
able to let go of the result.
But even more so when I
do it with anyone else,
I'll have the desire to
have it be a certain way.
And people interpret what
I'm saying differently.
They have different abilities.
Those can be
moments where I have
to remember that all
things are impermanent.
>> The first impression
is startling,
and reveals a
promising creation.
Andres Amador is a master
of the art, sand art.
>> I want to do another layer,
because the water's receded out
enough that we
can do a few more.
It'll kind of fade
into the back there.
That's cool.
>> Once you get your
moves and you get into it,
it's literally a dance.
It's-- not-- It was so good.
It's like in between
painting, dancing,
and some sort of Tai Chi.
It's beautiful.
It literally puts you in a flow.
I loved it.
We're going to, I think,
come together in the center,
or as close to center as we can.
And the petals layer
from the center.
And I'll do, like, a zoom
back and do a picture.
When I do my art,
the people who see it
are affected in some way.
And they're going to go out.
They're going to
carry on in their day
with a slight shift
in their being,
and they're going to
affect the next person.
In the end, everything's
impermanent.
Our lives are impermanent.
And everything around
us is impermanent.
Our friends, the work we do.
Anything we can create
will eventually fade away
and will be forgotten.
And that can be a
terrifying thought.
It can have us
reach out for things
that will give us
some kind of solidity.
But in the end, that's
all an illusion.
Security is an illusion.
And until we can make
peace with the fact
of ultimately our
own mortality, I
don't think we're truly living.
I think we somehow--
there's a tension inside
of us that we're holding,
and it doesn't really
allow us to be free.
I've done these
artworks as memorials
where people are coming
together to remember
someone who has died.
And we create something
beautiful together.
And then with the knowledge
that it will wash away,
which really is kind
of the passage of life.
>> Land art is a creative
experience where energies
converge.
Permanent or temporary,
solid like rock or as fragile
as a mandala, all
masterpieces are touched
by a ritual of initiation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]